\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename doc/rinari.info
@settitle Rinari: Ruby on Rails Minor Mode for Emacs

@set DATE July 2008

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Rinari Minor Mode: (Rinari).      Ruby on Rails Framework Support
@end direntry

@c Version and Contact Info
@c @set MAINTAINERSITE @uref{http://orgmode.org,maintainers webpage}
@set AUTHOR Eric Schulte
@set MAINTAINER Eric Schulte
@set MAINTAINEREMAIL @email{schulte dot eric at gmail dot com}
@set MAINTAINERCONTACT @uref{mailto:schulte dot eric at gmail dot com,contact the maintainer}
@c %**end of header
@finalout

@copying
This manual is for Rinari. A Ruby on Rails Minor Mode for Emacs.

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Eric Schulte, 2006 - 2007 Phil Hagelberg,
Forrest Chang, Ryan Davis, Paul Stickne, and others

(This manual is modeled off of the very fine org-mode info documentation.)

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Using Rinari

@subtitle Ruby on Rails Minor Mode
@author by Eric Schulte

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Rinari

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@b{Contents}

@menu
* Introduction::                      Brief summary of what Rinari is (and isn't)
* Install::                           Installing Rinari in your Emacs
* Navigation::                        Jumping between files in your Rails project
* Test/Behavior Driven Development::  Support for Test Driven Development
* Execution::                         Running tests, consoles, and web-servers
* Miscellaneous::                     Leftover functions
* Add Ons::                           Additional Emacs tools that work well with Rinari and Rails
@end menu

@b{Links}

@itemize
@item Project page on rubyforge @uref{http://rubyforge.org/projects/rinari/}
@item Latest versions available at
 @uref{http://github.com/eschulte/rinari/tree/master}
@item Post Questions/Comments to
@uref{http://groups.google.com/group/emacs-on-rails}
@item For an html version of this documentation see
 @uref{http://rinari.rubyforge.org/}
@item For information on the previous version of Rinari see
 @uref{http://rinari.rubyforge.org/old.html}
@end itemize

@node Introduction, Install, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

@b{R}inari @b{I}s @b{N}ot @b{A} @b{R}uby @b{I}DE.

Well, OK it kind of is. Rinari is a set of Emacs Lisp functions aimed
towards making Emacs into a top-notch Ruby on Rails development
environment.

Currently Rinari focuses on the core functionality most everyone would
use when working on a Rails applications including...

@itemize
@item @emph{Navigation} between files in your Rails project (@pxref{Navigation})
@item Facilitation of @emph{Test/Behavior Driven Development} (@pxref{Test/Behavior Driven Development})
@item @emph{Execution} of tests, consoles, and web-servers (@pxref{Execution})
@end itemize

Rinari does not deal with syntax highlighting for rhtml files (or
.html.erb from here on out all erb templated html files will be referred
to as ``rhtml'' files), while all of the Rinari functions will be
available from within your rhtml files you are free to chose from the
many stand-alone options for editing rhtml files (@pxref{Rhtml Setup}).

Rinari development is fueled largely by the discussion on the mailing
list at @uref{http://groups.google.com/group/emacs-on-rails}.  If you
have any questions, comments, or suggestions for improving Rinari please
take them to the list.  The latest version of Rinari will always be
available at @uref{http://github.com/eschulte/rinari/tree/master}.

@node Install, Basic Setup, Introduction, Top
@chapter Install
@cindex install

@b{Emacs}

Having a working copy and working knowledge of Emacs are definite
prerequisites for using Rinari.

@itemize
@item For information on obtaining and installing emacs see
@uref{www.gnu.org/software/emacs/} or
@uref{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emacs}.
@item If you are new to Emacs or any of the following doesn't make sense
to you, read through the Emacs tutorial.  To do so open Emacs and press
@code{C-ht} (meaning press the ``h'' key while holding down the ``Ctrl''
key and then press the ``t'' key).
@end itemize

@b{Major Modes}

There are a collection of Major Modes which are useful when working on a
Rails project (not the least of which is Ruby-Mode!).  You might want to
check this Major Mode List (@pxref{Add Ons}) to ensure that you aren't
missing anything vital.

@b{Rinari}

@menu
* Basic Setup::          The minimum required to get going with Rinari
* Rhtml Setup::          Select and setup a Major mode for rhtml files
* Optional Setup::       Some additional setup options
@end menu

The remainder of this document describes the functions and usage of
Rinari in detail.  To see all of the functions provided by rinari try
@code{C-hb} then search for rinari, or @code{M-x rinari-<tab>}.

@node Basic Setup, Rhtml Setup, Install, Install
@section Basic Setup
@cindex Basic Setup

The latest Rinari can be obtained from
@uref{http://github.com/eschulte/rinari/tree/master}.  Select the
``download'' button to grab an archive of the source code, or checkout a
copy using git (@b{Note}: when cloning Rinari using git it is necessary
to explicitly update the submodules included with Rinari) by executing
the following.

@example
git clone git://github.com/eschulte/rinari.git
cd rinari
git submodule init
git submodule update
@end example

Place the base rinari directory into your Emacs lisp directory. To
automatically load Rinari every time you open Emacs add these lines of
code to your .emacs file:

@lisp
  ;; Interactively Do Things (highly recommended, but not strictly required)
  (require 'ido)
  (ido-mode t)

  ;; Rinari
  (add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/your/elisp/rinari")
  (require 'rinari)
@end lisp

@node Rhtml Setup, Optional Setup, Basic Setup, Install
@section Rhtml Setup
@cindex Rhtml Setup

There are three options for editing .rhtml files in Emacs.  They are
presented here in order of decreasing functionality.

@menu
* nXhtml-Mode::           a package for web development
* MuMaMo-Mode::           allows multiple major modes in a single buffer
* rhtml-Mode::            edit rhtml files without using multiple major modes
@end menu

@node nXhtml-Mode, MuMaMo-Mode, Rhtml Setup, Rhtml Setup
@subsection nXhtml-Mode
@cindex nXhtml-Mode

nXhtml-Mode is a package for web development with Emacs.  For more
information see
@uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/NxhtmlMode#toc1}.

To use nXhtml-Mode mode download it from
@uref{http://ourcomments.org/Emacs/nXhtml/doc/nxhtml.html}.  Then save
the resulting directory into your elisp directory and add the following
to your Emacs init file (replacing ``nxml-directory'' with the name of
your downloaded nxml directory).

@lisp
;;; nxml (HTML ERB template support)
(load "~/path/to/your/elisp/nxml-directory/autostart.el")

(setq
 nxhtml-global-minor-mode t
 mumamo-chunk-coloring 'submode-colored
 nxhtml-skip-welcome t
 indent-region-mode t
 rng-nxml-auto-validate-flag nil
 nxml-degraded t)
(add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist '("\\.html\\.erb\\'" . eruby-nxhtml-mumamo))
@end lisp

@node MuMaMo-Mode, rhtml-Mode, nXhtml-Mode, Rhtml Setup
@subsection MuMaMo-Mode
@cindex MuMaMo-Mode

MuMaMo-Mode allow @b{Mu}ltiple @b{Ma}jor @b{Mo}des in a single Emacs
buffer.  For more information see
@uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/MuMaMo}.

MuMaMo-Mode comes bundled with nXhtml-Mode, so to install it download
nXhtml-Mode from
@uref{http://ourcomments.org/Emacs/nXhtml/doc/nxhtml.html}.  To use
MuMaMo-Mode when editing rhtml files, save the resulting directory into
your elisp directory, then add the following to your Emacs init file
(replacing ``nxml-directory'' with the name of your downloaded nxml
directory).

@lisp
;; MuMaMo-Mode for rhtml files
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/your/elisp/nxml-directory/util")
(require 'mumamo-fun)
(setq mumamo-chunk-coloring 'submode-colored)
(add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist '("\\.rhtml\\'" . eruby-html-mumamo))
(add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist '("\\.html\\.erb\\'" . eruby-html-mumamo))
@end lisp

@node rhtml-Mode, , MuMaMo-Mode, Rhtml Setup
@subsection rhtml-Mode
@cindex rhtml-Mode

@emph{rhtml-mode} is part of the original Rinari project.  It allows
editing of rhtml projects without having to use the often flaky MMM-Mode
@uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/MultipleModes}.
@emph{rhtml-mode} is presented here as an alternate option to
nxhtml-mode which doesn't work for many people.

To use @emph{rhtml-mode} for editing rhtml files, download the rhtml
directory from @uref{http://github.com/eschulte/rhtml/tree/master} and
place it in your elisp directory, then include the following in you
emacs .init file

@lisp
;;; rhtml-mode
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/your/elisp/rhtml")
(require 'rhtml-mode)
(add-hook 'rhtml-mode-hook
	  (lambda () (rinari-launch)))
@end lisp


@node Optional Setup, Navigation, Rhtml Setup, Install
@section Optional Setup
@cindex Optional Setup

@b{documentation}

To make and install the info documentation cd into @code{rinari}
directory and run the following rake command (you must have super user
privileges to install the info documentation).

@example
rake doc:install_info
@end example

To make an html version of the documentation cd into the @code{rinari}
directory and run the following rake command.

@example
rake doc:make_html
@end example

@b{ido-mode}

While ido-mode
@uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/InteractivelyDoThings} is
not strictly required it is very helpful in combination with many of
Rinari functions.  Also, the Rinari functions were developed using
ido-mode and may not work well in it's absence.  For more information
about enabling ido-mode see the link below, or to just go ahead and try
it out add the following to your emacs init file.

@lisp
;; Interactively Do Things
(require 'ido)
(ido-mode t)
@end lisp

@b{TAGS}

To have Rinari automatically update your @code{tags-file-name} variable
to point to the tags of your current rails project, set
@code{rinari-tags-file-name} (@pxref{Navigation}) to the path to your
tags file relative to the root of your rails applications.

@lisp
(setq rinari-tags-file-name "TAGS")
@end lisp

@node Navigation, Test/Behavior Driven Development, Optional Setup, Top
@chapter Navigation
@cindex navigation

Rinari leverages the structure of Rails projects to allow immediate
navigation between source files.

So for example if you are in a buffer open to @emph{foo_controller.rb},
a call to @code{rinari-find-model} will open the @emph{foo.rb} model
file.  Say you are currently inside the @emph{bar} method in a buffer
visiting @emph{foo_controller.rb}, then calling @code{rinari-find-test}
will take you to the @emph{test_bar} method in
@emph{test/functional/foo_controller_test.rb}, or calling
@code{rinari-find-view} will open @emph{app/views/foos/bar.rhtml}.

All told there are currently 17 different rinari-find-* functions, which
are all bound to similar hopefully intuitive keybindings allowing you to
go anywhere from anywhere.  To see the full range of rinari-find
functions along with their bindings enter a rails project, activate
rinari and call describe-bindings @code{\H-b}.  The current list is also
shown below.

@example
C-c ; f c	rinari-find-controller
C-c ; f e	rinari-find-environment
C-c ; f f	rinari-find-file-in-project
C-c ; f h	rinari-find-helper
C-c ; f i	rinari-find-migration
C-c ; f j	rinari-find-javascript
C-c ; f l	rinari-find-plugin
C-c ; f m	rinari-find-model
C-c ; f n	rinari-find-configuration
C-c ; f o	rinari-find-log
C-c ; f p	rinari-find-public
C-c ; f s	rinari-find-script
C-c ; f t	rinari-find-test
C-c ; f v	rinari-find-view
C-c ; f w	rinari-find-worker
C-c ; f x	rinari-find-fixture
C-c ; f y	rinari-find-stylesheet
@end example

@b{TAGS (jumping to method definitions)}

Emacs (as all grownup text editors should) makes use of tags (for a
description of tags and their use see
@uref{http://ctags.sourceforge.net/whatis.html}).  In Emacs the
@code{find-tag} command is bound by default to @code{M-.}.  It is often
convenient to use a different set of TAGS for every rails project.
Rinari facilitates this by automatically updating your
@code{tags-file-name} variable whenever you enter a rails project,
through the use of the @code{rinari-tags-file-name} variable.  Just set
@code{rianri-tags-file} to the path to your tags files relative to the
root of the rails project.  For example...

@lisp
(setq rinari-tags-file-name "TAGS")
@end lisp

to create such a tags file using exuberant ctags
(@uref{http://ctags.sourceforge.net/}) try executing something like the
following from the root of your rails project.

@example
ctags-exuberant -a -e -f TAGS --tag-relative -R app lib vendor
@end example

@node Test/Behavior Driven Development, Execution, Navigation, Top
@chapter Test/Behavior Driven Development
@cindex test/behavior driven development

Rinari facilitates a development style reliant upon unit and functional
tests by providing a single command @code{rinari-test} which executes
the unit or functional test related to the current buffer and method.
The results of the test are dumped into an emacs Compilation buffer
which allows jumping between error messages and the related source code.

@defun rinari-test
Test the current ruby function.  If current function is not a
test, then try to jump to the related test and run it.  Dump
output to a compilation buffer allowing jumping between errors
and source code.
@end defun

@node Execution, Miscellaneous, Test/Behavior Driven Development, Top
@chapter Execution
@cindex execution

Some Rails tools work better inside of emacs.  Specifically running rake
tasks, tests, console, the web-server, and browsing your SQL database.
Rinari provides functions for running all of these tools inside
specialized emacs buffers.

@defun rinari-rake
Tab completion selection of a rake task to execute with the output
dumped to a compilation buffer allowing jumping between errors and
source code.  With optional prefix argument allows editing of the rake
command.
@end defun

@defun rinari-console
"Run script/console in a compilation buffer, with command
history and links between errors and source code.  Use a prefix
argument to edit command line options."
@end defun

@defun rinari-sql
Browse the application's database.  Looks up login information from your
conf/database.sql file.
@end defun

@defun rinari-web-server
Run script/server.  Dump output to a compilation buffer allowing jumping
between errors and source code.
@end defun

@defun rinari-test
Test the current ruby function.  If current function is not a test, then
try to jump to the related test using `rinari-find-test'.  Dump output
to a compilation buffer allowing jumping between errors and source code.
@end defun

@node Miscellaneous, Add Ons, Execution, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous
@cindex Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous functions...

@defun rinari-rgrep
Search through the rails project using `rgrep' for a string or `regexp'.
With optional prefix argument just run `rgrep'.
@end defun

@defun rinari-insert-erb-skeleton
Insert an erb skeleton at point, with optional prefix argument don't
include an '='.
@end defun

@node Add Ons, , Miscellaneous, Top
@chapter Add Ons
@cindex Add Ons

Previous versions of both emacs-rails mode, and Rinari were very feature
rich, but bloated and cumbersome.  To maintain a small, clean, reliable,
functional, and hackable core Rinari will shun much of the ``bells and
whistles'' type functionality.  However that is not to say that these
extra goodies might not be useful.

This page should serve as marshaling point for links to some other
tools/packages that work well with Rinari and Rails in general.  If you
have any ideas for additions to this list, or for new Rinari features
please let us know at
@uref{http://groups.google.com/group/emacs-on-rails}.

@b{Essential Major Modes for working with Rails}
@itemize
@item @b{Ruby Mode}, and some other general Ruby-Emacs goodies can be found in the @code{/misc} directory
of your ruby distribution and at
@uref{http://svn.ruby-lang.org/cgi-bin/viewvc.cgi/trunk/misc/}
@item @b{YAML Mode} @uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/YamlMode}
@item @b{CSS Mode} @uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/emacs/css-mode-simple.el}
@item @b{JavaScript Mode} @uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/JavaScriptMode#toc1}
@end itemize

@b{Other Tools}
@itemize
@item @b{Rhtml Mode} Minor Mode for editing rhtml files (without MMM-Mode) @pxref{rhtml-Mode}
@item @b{Snippets} @uref{http://code.google.com/p/yasnippet/} and
@b{Rails snippets} @uref{http://github.com/eschulte/yasnippets-rails/tree/master}
@item @b{ruby-debug} support
@uref{http://groups.google.com/group/emacs-on-rails/browse_thread/thread/dfaa224905b51487}
@item @b{ido Mode} @uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/InteractivelyDoThings}
@end itemize

@bye
